# project_1
Unemployment rates have been headline news in the United States often in our lives, as well as throughout recent history. This is a well known and well used dataset. For our project we wanted to look at this often quoted percentage in relation to a few different metrics. We were interested initially with the phenomena of “ghost jobs” as named in a 2022 Forbes article shared during our brainstorm. We were curious to see if there would be any correlation between the amount of job listings and unemployment rates over time. From this point we spread outwards thinking of other data sets we could compare against the unemployment rate datasets we had, curious of any correlations we may discover. 
At times we were limited by our access to some data. Initially we were discouraged as LinkedIn’s posting data (amount of jobs posted, types of jobs posted, etc.) is not a publicly available dataset. However, we were able to gather this data through Indeed which was beneficial to our analysis. Our population data was gathered from the U.S. Census. Our employment, unemployment, and ethnicity data was gathered from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
	To begin we wanted to plot the unemployment rate, both nationally and within Illinois, across time. This dataset was obtained through the U.S. Census public database from two different surveys, and the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics through their public database. We first plotted the unemployment rate nationally across time to give ourselves a baseline of understanding. From there we gathered population data for Illinois across time, and the number of unemployed people in Illinois across time. We averaged the unemployed population rates by year and plotted the comparison on a bar graph against the total Illinois population data by year. What we saw was that the population that was unemployed was below 10% of the states population across the timespan we had access to. Unsurprisingly the largest uptick we saw in our data was during 2020, an increase of 127.38%. We were glad to see that rate was beginning to fall again in 2021, with a decrease of 34.38%. These findings were not surprising for us, we were all well aware of the job market's volatility over the last ten years especially during 2020. 
	We then began to look at other datasets we could compare against unemployment. Noting the decrease in the Illinois’ unemployed population post 2020 we were curious how different ethnicities were affected. For this comparison we looked at unemployment by ethnicity, white, asian, black or african american, and hispanic, across time. We noticed some interesting trends here. While all groups were affected by the steep uptick in unemployment during and after 2020, the severity of this change was markedly different. Those who identified as white and asian had the lowest percentages of unemployment prior to 2020 and recovered back to pre-pandemic levels the fastest. While those who identified as black and hispanic not only began with disproportionately higher rates (12% for those who identify as black vs 5% for those who identify as white in 2013). The percent change from 2019 to 2020 across these groups showed equal increase however keeping in mind the disportunate starting percentages paints a much more interesting picture. On the recovery side we see all groups recovering to their pre-pandemic levels however there is another uptick in unemployment for those who identify as hispanic which would be best explored through the socio-political and socio-economic views of 2022 through 2023, where we see this uptick. 
	We were fortunate to have access to Indeed job posting data. This is self published through their website to provide a bit of transparency in their website analytics. We took a look at this data plotting them as line graphs against time and noticed there was a large uptick in job postings post 2020. Beginning December 31st, 2020 and continuing through 2023 we noticed both nationally and in Illinois significantly more job postings. Both unemployment and job postings begin their decrease in 2022. Postings had the steepest increase 2020 through 2021, (December through December) peaking with the highest change in December of 2022. National unemployment peaked near 7% in 2021 beginning to fall through 2022 and steeply decline through to 2023. We thought the data would be inversely relational, the fewest job posting times being those of highest unemployment however this was not what we saw which was very surprising. We were limited by our Indeed dataset as it began in 2020 and only continued through to now however we were still able to see it did not mirror unemployment as we were expecting it to. 
	We began to think about other interactions of unemployment in our lives, socially what does this do to relationships (marriage rates, divorce rates, etc.), economically what does it do for home bills and rent (how many eviction notices are generated when there is an uptick in unemployment). Our major findings related to unemployment were that it is university experienced however the severity is differently felt by different ethnicities. We also were surprised by our findings related to job postings. Our assumptions that more posting means lower unemployment was not proven which is interesting and worth digging into further. 
